 Questions to Ask in Job Interviews

## As a Devops Engineer, ask questions based on the environment as discribed by the Hiring manager. These sample questions should serve as guide##

***That’s the end of your DevOps interview, do you have any questions for the panel? 
Sample Answer: 
Thank you. Yes, I do: 
Q. What are the most difficult DevOps challenges you have been facing from an organizational perspective 
over the last 12 months? 
Q. If I am successful, what would you need me to concentrate on immediately within the first few weeks of 
starting? 
Q. Can you tell me what the culture is like within the organization? 
Q. Do you have any exciting or new plans for the organization over the forthcoming 12 months that I would 
be involved in if I am successful?***

1. What is the most important thing I should accomplish in the first 6 months in order for you to say I have had a successful start?
 With this question, you're helping the hiring manager visualize you in the new role. 

2. What are the top 3 skills you look for in this role?
 This question helps you reiterate why you are a perfect fit for the role.

3. What qualities are you looking for that will best complement the team?
 This question helps you understand whether you will feel good when working with the team; It also enables you to showcase how you will add to
 the team.

4. What do you consider your biggest success at company X?
You indirectly compliment the hiring manager with this question (Research shows that candidates who complimented the interviewer received
 more job offers). It also helps you understand what success means to them. 

5. What goals or KPIs will my performance be measured against?
 This question helps you understand how success is measured.

6. Why did you join this company, and what do you like about working here?
 This question helps you create a better connection with the interviewer and discover what you have in common. 

7. How do you see the company in 3-5 years from now, and what do you personally find most exciting about the company's future?
 This question showcases your strategic thinking and plants the seeds for salary negotiation. Research shows companies will pay
 more for perceived potential than past performance.

8. In your annual report, I read that the company went through a reorganization last year. What was the impact on the company culture?
 This question shows that you did your research; It also helps you evaluate if the company shares your values. 

9. I appreciate the fact that the interview process is transparent and makes me feel respected. Besides transparency and respect, what are your top
 values when working in a team? 
You've now complimented the company and also asked about their values. 

10. What specific Diversity and Inclusion projects or measures has the company implemented over the last 1-2 years, and how would you describe their
 impact? 
This question helps you understand if DE&I is really part of the company's culture. Asking these 10 questions helps you leverage the Event Memory Effect: 

##Research tells us that the ending of the job interview will strongly influence the hiring manager's memory of the whole interview.##


More Questions:
What do you like about working here?
How does the company promote personal growth?
What is the current level of technical debt you are dealing with?
Why I should NOT join you? (or 'what you don't like about working here?')
What was your favorite project you've worked on?
If you could change one thing about your day to day, what would it be?
Let's say that we agree and you hire me to this position, after X months, what do you expect that I have achieved?
